DOCSUP-14334: ClickHouse over web server with static files (#29156)
ClickHouse/ClickHouse: docs/en/operations/storing-data.md

Data, processed in ClickHouse, is usually stored in the local file system — on the same machine with the ClickHouse server. That requires large-capacity disks, which can be expensive enough. To avoid that you can store the data remotely — on [Amazon S3](https://aws.amazon.com/s3/) disks or in the Hadoop Distributed File System ([HDFS](https://hadoop.apache.org/docs/current/hadoop-project-dist/hadoop-hdfs/HdfsDesign.html)). 

To work with data stored on `Amazon S3` disks use [S3](../engines/table-engines/integrations/s3.md) table engine, and to work with data in the Hadoop Distributed File System — [HDFS](../engines/table-engines/integrations/hdfs.md) table engine.

> To store data on a web server as static files use a disk with type [web](#storing-data-on-webserver).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To load data from a web server with static files use a disk with type [web](#storing-data-on-webserver).
```

    </storage_configuration>
</yandex>
```

> ## Configuring WebServer {#configuring-webserver}

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Configuring Web Server {#configuring-webserver}
```

> Uses to store data on web server as static files (for example, table's data directory) using a disk with type `web` and to run queries on this data. It can be useful for serving public datasets.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can store data on a web server as static files (for example, table's data directory) using a disk with type `web` and run queries on this data. It can be useful for serving public datasets.
```

Example of disk configuration:

``` xml
<yandex>
    <storage_configuration>
        <disks>
            <web>
                <type>web</type>
                <endpoint>http://nginx:80/hits/</endpoint>
            </web>
        </disks>
        <policies>
            <web>
                <volumes>
                    <main>
                        <disk>web</disk>
                    </main>
                </volumes>
            </web>
        </policies>
    </storage_configuration>
</yandex>
```

> You can use [http_max_single_read_retries](../operations/settings/settings.md#http-max-single-read-retries) setting to set the maximum number of retries during a single HTTP read.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use [http_max_single_read_retries](../operations/settings/settings.md#http-max-single-read-retries) setting to limit the maximum number of retries during a single HTTP read.
```

> You can use [http_max_single_read_retries](../operations/settings/settings.md#http-max-single-read-retries) setting to set the maximum number of retries during a single HTTP read.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use [http_max_single_read_retries](../operations/settings/settings.md#http-max-single-read-retries) setting to set the maximum number of retries during a single HTTP read.
```

Required parameters:

-   `type` — `web`. Otherwise the disk is not created.

> -   `endpoint` — The endpoint URL in `path` format. Endpoint URL should contain a root path to store data that was obtained using the `clickhouse-static-files-uploader` utility.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
-   `endpoint` — The endpoint URL in `path` format. Endpoint URL must contain a root path to store data that was obtained using the `clickhouse-static-files-uploader` utility.
```

A ready test case. You need to add this configuration to config:

``` xml
<yandex>
    <storage_configuration>
        <disks>
            <web>
                <type>web</type>
                <endpoint>https://clickhouse-datasets.s3.yandex.net/disk-with-static-files-tests/test-hits/</endpoint>
            </web>
        </disks>
        <policies>
            <web>
                <volumes>
                    <main>
                        <disk>web</disk>
                    </main>
                </volumes>
            </web>
        </policies>
    </storage_configuration>
</yandex>
```

And then execute this query:

```sql
ATTACH TABLE test_hits UUID '1ae36516-d62d-4218-9ae3-6516d62da218'
(
    WatchID UInt64,

>     JavaEnable UInt8,

Reviewer: May be flatten it in one line, otherwise its too long to scroll. Like here there is the same table definition but in one line https://clickhouse.com/docs/ru/getting-started/example-datasets/metrica/
Also please apply changes from commit https://github.com/ClickHouse/ClickHouse/pull/29156/commits/22b04bf224cdbb562abdcadf032ed885b8bc34a4 to a russian version.

    HasGCLID UInt8,
    RefererHash UInt64,
    URLHash UInt64,
    CLID UInt32,
    YCLID UInt64,
    ShareService String,
    ShareURL String,
    ShareTitle String,
    ParsedParams Nested(
        Key1 String,
        Key2 String,
        Key3 String,
        Key4 String,
        Key5 String,
        ValueDouble Float64),
    IslandID FixedString(16),
    RequestNum UInt32,
    RequestTry UInt8
)
ENGINE = MergeTree()
PARTITION BY toYYYYMM(EventDate)
ORDER BY (CounterID, EventDate, intHash32(UserID))
SAMPLE BY intHash32(UserID)
SETTINGS storage_policy='web';
```

Required parameters:

-   `type` — `web`. Otherwise the disk is not created.
-   `endpoint` — The endpoint URL in `path` format. Endpoint URL must contain a root path to store data, where they were uploaded.

Optional parameters:

-   `min_bytes_for_seek` — The minimal number of bytes to use seek operation instead of sequential read. Default value: `1` Mb.
-   `remote_fs_read_backoff_threashold` — The maximum wait time when trying to read data for remote disk. Default value: `10000` seconds.
-   `remote_fs_read_backoff_max_tries` — The maximum number of attempts to read with backoff. Default value: `5`.

> If query fails with an exception `DB:Exception Unreachable URL`, then may help to adjust settings: [http_connection_timeout](../operations/settings/settings.md#http_connection_timeout), [http_receive_timeout](../operations/settings/settings.md#http_receive_timeout), [keep_alive_timeout](../operations/server-configuration-parameters/settings.md#keep-alive-timeout).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a query fails with an exception `DB:Exception Unreachable URL`, then you can try to adjust the settings: [http_connection_timeout](../operations/settings/settings.md#http_connection_timeout), [http_receive_timeout](../operations/settings/settings.md#http_receive_timeout), [keep_alive_timeout](../operations/server-configuration-parameters/settings.md#keep-alive-timeout).
```

To get files for upload run:
`clickhouse static-files-disk-uploader --metadata-path <path> --output-dir <dir>` (`--metadata-path` can be found in query `SELECT data_paths FROM system.tables WHERE name = 'table_name'`).

> When loading files by `endpoint` they must be loaded into `<endpoint>/store/` path, but config must contain only `endpoint`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When loading files by `endpoint`, they must be loaded into `<endpoint>/store/` path, but config must contain only `endpoint`.
```

    </storage_configuration>
</yandex>
```

## Storing Data on Web Server {#storing-data-on-webserver}

> You can store data on a web server as static files (for example, table's data directory) using a disk with type `web` and run queries on this data. It can be useful for serving public datasets.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a tool `clickhouse-static-files-uploader`, which prepared data directory for a given table (`SELECT data_paths FROM system.tables WHERE name=='table_name'`). For each table you need, you get a directory of files. These files can be uploaded to, for example, a web server with static files. After this preparation you can load this table into any clickhouse server via `DiskWeb`.
```

> The following types of queries are not supported: [CREATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/create/table.md), [ALTER TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/alter/index.md), [RENAME TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/rename.md#misc_operations-rename_table), [DETACH TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/detach.md) and [TRUNCATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/truncate.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following types of queries are not supported: [CREATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/create/table.md), [ALTER TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/alter/index.md), [RENAME TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/rename.md#misc_operations-rename_table), [ATTACH TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/attach.md), [DETACH TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/detach.md) and [TRUNCATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/truncate.md).
```

> The following types of queries are not supported: [CREATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/create/table.md), [ALTER TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/alter/index.md), [RENAME TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/rename.md#misc_operations-rename_table), [DETACH TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/detach.md) and [TRUNCATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/truncate.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The following types of queries are not supported: [CREATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/create/table.md), [ALTER TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/alter/index.md), [RENAME TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/rename.md#misc_operations-rename_table), [ATTACH TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/attach.md), [DETACH TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/detach.md) and [TRUNCATE TABLE](../sql-reference/statements/truncate.md).
```

> Supports only for tables of the [MergeTree](../engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree.md) and [Log](../engines/table-engines/log-family/log.md) families. To access the data stored on the `web` disk, use the [storage_policy](../engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree.md#terms) setting when executing the query. For example, `ATTACH TABLE table_web UUID '{}' (id Int32) ENGINE = MergeTree() ORDER BY id SETTINGS storage_policy = 'web'`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This kind of storage is supported only for the [MergeTree](../engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree.md) and [Log](../engines/table-engines/log-family/log.md) families. To access the data stored on a `web` disk, use the [storage_policy](../engines/table-engines/mergetree-family/mergetree.md#terms) setting when executing the query. For example, `ATTACH TABLE table_web UUID '{}' (id Int32) ENGINE = MergeTree() ORDER BY id SETTINGS storage_policy = 'web'`.
```

> Example of disk configuration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ready test case. You need to add this configuration to config:
<xml from below>
and then execute this query 
``` <paste it https://github.com/ClickHouse/ClickHouse/blob/master/src/Disks/DiskWebServer.h#L17>

``` xml
<yandex>
    <storage_configuration>
        <disks>
            <web>
                <type>web</type>

>                 <endpoint>http://nginx:80/hits/</endpoint>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
                <endpoint>https://clickhouse-datasets.s3.yandex.net/disk-with-static-files-tests/test-hits/</endpoint>

```

            </web>
        </disks>
        <policies>
            <web>
                <volumes>
                    <main>
                        <disk>web</disk>
                    </main>
                </volumes>
            </web>
        </policies>
    </storage_configuration>
</yandex>
```

Required parameters:

-   `type` — `web`. Otherwise the disk is not created.

> -   `endpoint` — The endpoint URL in `path` format. Endpoint URL must contain a root path to store data that was obtained using the `clickhouse-static-files-uploader` utility.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `endpoint` — The endpoint URL in `path` format. Endpoint URL must contain a root path to store data, where they were uploaded.
```

Optional parameters:

-   `min_bytes_for_seek` — The minimal number of bytes to use seek operation instead of sequential read. Default value: `1` Mb.

> -   `remote_disk_read_backoff_threashold` — The maximum wait time when trying to read data for remote disk. Default value: `10000` seconds.
> -   `remote_disk_read_backoff_max_tries` — The maximum number of attempts to read with backoff. Default value: `5`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
-   `remote_fs_read_backoff_threashold` — The maximum wait time when trying to read data for remote disk. Default value: `10000` seconds.
-   `remote_fs_read_backoff_max_tries` — The maximum number of attempts to read with backoff. Default value: `5`.
```

> 

Reviewer: also add these comments:
https://github.com/ClickHouse/ClickHouse/blob/340fb049cff85ab9ccb1e9c9db18a2677d381df6/src/Disks/DiskWebServer.h#L37-L47
